One key method that you will use to
reduce the computational cost of finding
Neighbors in high dimensional spaces
is locality sensitive hashing.
In this video, I will teach you what
hashes are and where they are used.
To start thinking about
locality sensitive hashing,
let's first assume that you're using
word vectors with just two dimensions.
Other pits each vector as
a circle instead of arrows.
So let's say you want to find a way to
know that these blue dots are somehow
close to each other, and that these grey
dots are also related to each other.
First divide the space using these
dashed lines, which I'll call planes.
I'll explain why I call
them planes in a bit.
Notice how the blue plain slices up the
space into vectors that are above it or
below it.
The blue vectors all happen to be
on the same side of the blue plane.
Similarly, the gray vectors happen
to be above the grey plane.
It looks like the planes can help us
bucket the vectors into subsets based on
their location,
this is exactly what you want.
A hashing function that is sensitive
to the location of the items that it's
assigning into buckets.
You're working your way towards
locality sensitive hashing.
Now, let's see why I'm calling
these dash lines planes.
A plane would be this magenta line into
two dimensional space and it actually
represents all the possible vectors
that would be sitting on that plane.
In other words, they would be parallel
to the plane such as this blue vector or
this orange vector.
You can define a plane with a single
vector, this magenta vector is
perpendicular to the plane and it's
called the normal vector to that plain.
The normal vector is perpendicular to
any vectors that lie on the plane.
It might help to think about
this in three dimensions,
find a sheet of paper and find a pencil.
Place the paper on the table and
draw some vectors on it,
then hold the pencil
vertically over the paper.
Any vectors on the paper
are perpendicular to the pencil.
Let's go back to two dimensions, you are
able to see visually when the vector is on
one side of the plane or the other.
But how do you do this mathematically?
Here are three sample vectors in blue,
orange and
green, the normal vector
to the plane is labeled P.
Let's focus on vector one,
what if you take the dot product of
P with vector one, you get three.
I'll explain in a bit
why you're doing this.
Now, Let's look at Vector two,
if you take the dot products of
P with vector two you get zero.
Finally, Let's look at the extra three,
if you take the dot product of P with
vector three, you get negative three.
So the dots products are three,
zero, and negative three.
Do you notice something
about the signs and
how they're related to their
position relative to the red plane?
When the dot product is positive,
the vector is on one side of the plane.
If the dot product is negative, the vector
is on the opposite side of the plane.
If the dot product is zero,
the vector is on the plane, so
what's the dot products doing.
To visualize the dot product,
imagine one of the vectors such as P
as if it's the surface of the earth.
Gravity pulls all objects straight
down towards the surface of the earth,
next pretend you're standing
at the end of the vector V1.
You tie a string to a rock and
let gravity pull the rock to the surface
of vector P,
the string is perpendicular to vector P.
Now, if you draw a vector that's in
the same direction of P, what ends up at
the rock, you have what's called
the projection of vector V1 onto vector P.
The magnitude or length of that vector is
equal to the dot product of V one and P.
Furthermore, if you had this other green
vector and projected it onto vector p,
the projected vector would be pointing in
the parallel but opposite direction of P.
The dot product would
be a negative number.
This means that the sign of the dot
product indicates the direction of
the projection with respect
to the purple normal vector.
So whether the dot product is positive or
negative can tell you
whether the vector V1 or V2 are on
one side of the plane or the other.
Let's use code to check which
side of the plane a vector is on.
The function side of plane takes in
the normal vector P and a vector V.
Use np dot to take the dot product,
use np dot sign to get a plus one,
if the dot product is positive.
-1 if the product is negative or
zero if the dot product is zero,
I'm using np dot as scalar.
Notice the pronunciation of that function,
if a vector can be represented
as a single scalar, dysfunction
retrieves that scalar and that's it.
Please try it out for yourself,
that was a lot of visualizations and
the lots of projections.
The main takeaway is that the sign of the
projection of two vectors tells you which
parts of the line the point lies.
For example, above it or below it.
In the next video, you will learn how to
combine this concept with multiple planes
to try to better approximate where
a data point might be located.